## Guide to Effective Prompting

Effective prompting is key to utilising AI to its full potential, and producing desired results efficiently. The most effective prompts ensure that the questions of ‘what?’, ‘why?’ and ‘how?’ are answered, identifying the key information such as the task, aims, audience and execution. Frameworks to guide prompting exist and may be utilised best under varying scenarios.

Basic prompting involves detailing the task and expected outcome, answering the question of ‘what?’. Frameworks such as AIM (action, intent, milestone) and  FIT (focus, input, task) may fall into this category, and do best with shorter, clear cut tasks that may have a limited set of solutions and outcomes, or that don’t require specific solution paths.

Intermediate prompting gives further context to the situation, allowing for greater relevance and appropriate tone, so that the response caters to target audiences. This prompting style answers the ‘why?’. Finally, advanced prompting answers all three questions, with specific instructions on constraints and actions to take. SYSTEM (situation, your role, steps, expectations, milestones), and FRAME (focus, results, actions, milestones, evaluation), are examples of such frameworks, and many even consider factors such as time and progress markers. This style of prompting returns specific and highly tailored responses which have an informed perspective on the given situation, making it suitable for large-scale, time-sensitive or high-stake projects, as well as for general use.

Having considered the content of effective prompting, it is also apt to discuss the prompting process. Zero-shot prompting is most simple, and quick, but may not be sufficient in complex cases. It may be appropriate, therefore, to attempt few-shot or chain-of-thought prompting, wherein providing examples to the AI, or prompting the AI to ‘think’ further on the topic, may improve accuracy or tone. The process of iteration may also result in more concise and accurate responses, and comparing responses across iterations may allow the prompter to grasp the concept more firmly. Finally, understanding and assigning the role of AI, whether as a collaborator, researcher, reviewer or otherwise, allows the AI to respond more closely to expectations and produce satisfactory results with fewer adjustments.


